---
layout: post
title: Rant on wrongness
---

# 1 Correct for the wrong reason
You are on a team of firefighters.
Your team is called out to a fire and is given a street but not a house number, for some reason.
You pull up to the street and see a blue house with smoke coming from behind it and a family gathered in the front yard waving at you for attention.
You are about to drive to the blue smoking house when Steve speaks up from the back of the truck.
"That house is blue, no way it's on fire" says Steve the fireman.
"Steve, again with your blue house theory? There is NO evidence that blue houses are don't catch fire." You say
"Disagree, I've never seen a blue house on fire. There is a red house down the street. You guys can waste your time with that house I'm going to walk down the street and look for fire in the red house."- Steve said
So, you agree to disagree, let Steve out and take the firetruck to the blue house.
The family in the front yard is frantically waving you run up and they say.
"Thank goodness you came; we were having a barbeque out back (hence the smoke) and we noticed that the red house at the end of the street is on fire! We were waving to let you know that!"
By the time you get to the red house Steve had pulled the family dog out of the house and extinguished the fire.
"See I told you" Steve says

Steve's thought process was wrong here.
Blue houses and red houses catch fire just as easily, but he still ended up correct.
Steve falls under a category I will lovingly call, correct for the wrong reason. A more sophisticated person might identify these as Gettier problems.

# 2 Examples of being wrong 

Correct for the wrong reason views are actually pretty common. You probably hold some correct for the wrong reason views. Here are some I have floating around in my head.
The following things are answers that you can get correct but for the wrong reasons. Answer them and see if you get it right.

* What is the dark side of the moon?

You will most likely say the side of the moon that faces away from earth, and your conclusion is 100% right. Maybe you even know that the moon is locked so that its spin is just right that we never see one particular side of the moon. Your conclusions are still 100% correct. But why did you think that is the "dark side of the moon"? Is it because it is always dark from getting no light? That is wrong. The whole moon gets sunlight, even the "dark side" but we only see one face of it. The dark side of the moon is called dark because we can't see it, not because it is dark. The dark side of the moon gets just as much sunlight as the side we see. This is an example of you having the right answer, you know what the "dark side of the moon" is, but you probably reached that conclusion for the wrong reason.

* Is it warmer in the summer or winter (for the northern hemisphere)?

If you said summer, you are 100% correct. But why did you say summer? There has got to be a reason it is hotter in the summer. If you think it is hotter in the summer because we are closer to the sun, your reasoning is wrong. It's hotter because the Earth's tilt exposes a different amount of surface area to the sun. Also, the tilt causes more daylight. The closeness to the sun has nothing to do with it. Again, correct conclusion, wrong reasoning.

* If you look at a piece of glass in a really old stained-glass window. Is the glass thickest at the bottom or top?

If you said the bottom, you are correct! If you think it's because glass is a slow-moving liquid, your reasoning is wrong. The glassmakers just put the thicker pieces in the bottom for structural integrity.

* Would you predict someone with a higher income has a higher credit score than someone with a lower income?

Statistically yes. Higher incomes means better credit scores. Your intuition is correct. But do you think that's because the credit score calculators use income to determine your credit score? credit score calculators are blind to income, but higher income does lead to higher spending limits which directly effects your credit score.

# 3 These are different from Steve the firefighter

Maybe you have caught the trick I am playing here. For example: You only need to know that when you press a button, the vending machine gives you a soda. You have no need to understand exactly how the vending machine works. Well then, I come around and ask what happens when you press the button on the soda machine? Yeah, a soda comes out but AHA gotcha, you have no idea how that happens! It's not fair to expect everyone to know everything. You are right you should not feel bad if you were wrong on any of these, in fact I cherry picked common misconceptions. It is totally okay to not understand how things work.

But Steve the firefighter (from the opening story) doesn't know how fires work. He thinks only red houses catch fire. Surely that is not okay. This is also correct because there are two different ways of justifying a conclusion.

# 4 There are two VERY DIFFERENT paths to a conclusion

1. (Henceforth Path 1 conclusions) You logically arrive at a novel conclusion and are able to backtrack through the steps you took.

For example: finish the sequence 3,6,9,12,...

I am confident that you looked at the numbers identified a pattern, applied that pattern and got 15. You used logic to arrive at your conclusion.

This is what Steve the fireman is doing when he decides the red house is on fire. He is reasoning through the options and arrives at a conclusion.

2. (Henceforth Path 2 conclusions) When a conclusion is cached in your memory, and you don’t remember the reason it got there. Sometimes we just memorize things without understanding them completely. If forced to give a reason, we make something up. 

For example: What is the powerhouse of the cell?

If you answered mitochondria, you are right! But unless you are a biologist you probably don't know why that is the case.

# 5 Only one of the two "Paths to a conclusion" is malleable 

So sometimes we hold a conclusion because we logically arrived there (path 1 above). Other times we hold a conclusion, but don't remember or fully understand why (path 2 above), so we make up reasons. Only in the first case is the logic coupled to the conclusion. This means only path 1 conclusions can have their reasoning attacked and have it effect the conclusion at all. If someone attacks a path 2 reason, it doesn't affect our conclusion because the conclusion never came from that line of reasoning, we just made it up on the spot.

## Example of Path 1 conclusion being changed

Imagine I showed Steve the fireman a blue house on fire (remember he has never seen a blue house on fire, and therefore thinks it’s impossible). He would most likely change his conclusion. The logic that he has never seen a blue house on fire actually lead him to the conclusion that blue houses don't burn. So, by correcting his reasoning we can correct his conclusion. Steve's conclusion is coupled with his reasoning. 

## Example of Path 2 conclusion not being changed

On the other hand: imagine you think the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell because it creates sugar. Well, if I correct you and say that mitochondria don’t create sugar, would you change your conclusion? No probably not. You would think, well it creates something that creates energy. Nothing I say about mitochondria is going to change your conclusion, that the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell. Your reasoning is not coupled to your conclusion.

# 6 Are political/social views Path 1 or Path 2

As another example, think about any political or remotely social view you have. Is it coupled to your reasoning or is it just a memorized point of view?

Let's pretend you are Catholic and hold the claim, "you have to go to church on Sunday"
Why? 
*Because the Bible says so of course.*
Well actually the Bible doesn't say that, in fact Jewish people who read the same Bible says it's Saturday.
*Well, the Catholic priests say so.*
I found a few Catholic priest that say if you can’t make it one week you won't go to hell.
*Well, the Catholic church says so....*

I won't go on forever but the idea I am trying to get across here is that attacking the reasoning here is useless if you never knew the reasoning to begin with. If someone just has memorized, "go to church on Sunday" or "the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell" or "immigration is bad for the United States" then reasoning is de-coupled from the idea and usually made up in the spot.

Political/social ideas are path 2 conclusions. Political ideas are just memorized ideas that we have been taught socially and we later make up justifications for them.

# 7 More than just politics

I think that so much more ideas than you think are just memorized. Our brains are slow. In fact, compared to computers on stepwise tasks, about 10 million times slower than modern day computer processors. A typical neuron firing as fast as possible can do maybe 200 spikes per second, that’s 200Hz. Can you imagine trying to run anything on a 200Hz processor?  How do we even function at that speed? Would it help if I told you we have around 2.5 petabytes (a lot) of storage space? We store stuff. We only have limited amount of calculation space so instead of calculating all the time we just cache information away for later.

This leads to the problem of almost every view you hold is just a stored idea, not a bunch of reasons and conclusions. Maybe you thought through the reasons once, a long time ago; but you have since forgot them. Most ideas you hold are de-coupled from any reasoning. If you are asked for reasons why you believe something, you just come up with reasons on the spot. 

Psychologists say this is actually how we think, and it explains a lot. If the reasons we give for something are never coupled to the conclusions we hold, we can never change our mind.

That is crazy right? Of course, we can change our mind.

Of course, I'm not saying that I'm just saying it's hard, really hard, impossibly hard.

I think that any views that are remotely related to Psycology or Sociology (which I think includes political views) are Path 2 conclusions. the next two sections are a little bit of an aside to support this claim.

# 8 The more complex the science, the less confident we are about it

I'm glad you asked,

I think the major sciences ordered from basic to most complex would go...
Physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, sociology.

I also think our confidence in these sciences goes in that order. I.e., Physics can tell you exactly how fast a ball will fall to the earth with 100% confidence, but sociology can't tell you if rainy weather effects crime rates with a lot of certainty. So here is where I split and say I draw the line at biology. You can rationally validate most problems up to biology but after that things get too complicated to actually rationalize and you need to turn to the experts.

So we aren't reasoning through these things and storing Path 1 conclusions, we are memorizing "expert" opinions and storing path 2 conclusions.

# 9 WE don't know anything from psychology and Sociology (and politics)

I'm not saying THE EXPERTS don't know anything form psychology and sociology, I'm just saying US NON-EXPERTS don't know anything from psychology and Sociology. Unless you are an expert, you probably don't know anything though. Absolutely no disrespect to the fields. The fields have a lot of accumulated knowledge. In fact, I am saying in a lot of ways they are harder than physics/bio/chem. 

Because of the extreme complexity in psychology/sociology, any results in those fields are pretty low confidence even for the experts (compared to physics). Even if there is a high confidence, there is a LOT of nuances. For a non-expert there is very little trustworthy information.

So even the experts aren't giving us perfect path 2 conclusions to store!

# 10 We probably aren't hearing the experts

Any social, political, or even just self-improvement (psychology) ideas are complex, so I think it is safe to say that no single non-expert has ever reasoned through them. Maybe you listen to "experts" but be careful of anyone calling themselves an expert "politician", or "socialite" or "self-improvement guru". 

All the real experts in these fields all agree that the truth is complex and nuanced. Anyone willing to yell the "right answer" into a microphone is an idiot.

So we proabably aren't listening to the correct experts, and may be storing incorrect path 2 conclusions. 

# 11 How to fix it?

This is a problem. If you follow my reasoning:
- Most Pycological/Social/Political views we hold are path 2 conclusions
- Most Pycological/Social/Political views we hold are from bad sources
- Path 2 conclusions cannot be reasoned with or updated easily

I honestly do not know the answer to this problem. I just want to point out that a lot of YOUR views aren't really your views. They are memorized views that stand in very little reasoning. No point in attacking the reasoning because they aren't the real reasons.

How do we fix it?

- We can try a ground up investigation, but we are going to be severely biased (confirmation bias).

- We can try getting other viewpoints. Although if you quickly go searching for the opposing view, what you will get is the loudest opposing view not the best. So, this actually take a lot of effort.

- You can accept that anything social, political, self-improvement, or very complex is not worth the effort and you can leave it up to the experts. That's not very democratic though, we do all get a vote.

- Every time we recall a cached view, you should be questioning it. This sounds exhausting but try to put a probability on it. Every person who refutes your view probably should push your probability closer to zero, even if it's a tiny bit. The process of trying to hone in this probability is called rational thinking and it cannot be summarized in a blog post.

# 12 Conclusion

I don't know how to conclude this. I haven't figured it out. But knowing this I am more accepting of view that oppose my own... Or maybe I am more aware of how weak my views actually are.

We aren't supposed to talk politics, but maybe we should. Just come to the table knowing that no one is right, no one knows it all, and stop trying to defend your views! You gain nothing from protecting your reasoning (which isn't even your reasoning because remember everything from above), be selfish for once and seek knowledge. Try to figure out what would make you change your mind, or what information you would like to know more about. You should be seeking this information; you should be changing your views often.

Progress is slow and painstaking. Also, the most talked about and interesting topics are usually the least important because nothing shuts up a conversation like nuance or subtlety and that is where reality lies.

# Concerns about this post

This post covers a lot. I could have expanded it into a book, but I wanted to get it down. It has some shortcomings that I want to address. 

## Everyone but me totally does think this way
I worry that anyone reading this may think. Everyone does have flawed thinking, that's why they don't agree with me! Well, I just wrote a whole post explaining why I can't refute your reasons for believing that. But what evidence do you have that YOU have the correct view on X. (Substitute X with immigration policy, police reform, etc.). What would it take for you to change your view? When was the last time you doubted your view (if you are Bayesian, when did you adjust your probability)? If you have never doubted your view, then you are not thinking rationally. If nothing could change your mind, it's not there for the right reasons.

## Things are complicated so don't judge me
My dog pooping on my neighbor’s lawn is a complex social problem that no one has researched, and no one can resolve. Therefore, I should continue letting my dog poop on the neighbor’s lawn. If your actions upset someone you have a lot of evidence, it's bad. If you upset more than one person, you have so much evidence that you are doing something bad. You would need a crazy amount of counter evidence to allow you to upset a lot of people. Soooo, don't upset a lot of people, okay?


## I made up some terms
This is for my beautiful wife. She complains that she occasionally repeats things I say but it somehow makes her look stupid because I didn't give the whole story. I made up terms like ****Path 1 conclusions** and **path 2 conclusions**, dont use these terms in a conversation, no one will get it. 


