---
layout: post
title: Occam's 5 bladed, moisturizing, wifi enabled razor
comments: true
---

# Occam's razor

Occam's razor means the simplest explanation is usually the best. It is the idea that unnecessary details make a proof LESS likely. To get more abstract, p(A ∩ B) =p(a) *p(b), or the probability of a and b is the product of the two probabilities by their own. Because probabilities are smaller than 1, this means the probability of a and b is smaller than a or b on their own. This means if you have a potential solution to a problem, A. And someone else has a solution that is like A, but a little more complicated A and B. Solution A is always more likely than A and B together. 

To get less abstract and more concrete. Imagine you are Copernicus, trying to make out how the planets move. You believe that we live in a geocentric world, meaning the planets revolve around the earth. You observe apparent retrograde cycles, which is when planets switch directions across the sky. If planets rotate around us, why would they switch directions? It could be that the planets move around the sun, and your theory is wrong. But you must protect your theory! What if while rotating around the earth, the planets have their own circles. That doesn't explain it perfectly? Add another cycle to that. You can now precisely describe every orbit. Fourier will later prove that a series of circles can explain any orbit. 
So Copernicus has a choice, either:
- every planet revolves around the sun
- planets revolve around the earth, and move in small circles within those orbits, and within those orbits move in small orbits.

Occam's razor would suggest that the more complicated an explanation the less likely it is. Copernicus would have been wise to consider this. 

## Not a law
This section is more of an aside, but I feel it is not right to ignore.
While it is true simpler is more likely, it is not a definite thing. Just because something is more likely doesn't mean it is correct. Occam's razor doesn't mean simpler is right, it means simpler is more likely. 

## simple is in the eye of the beholder
_the simplest solution_ may be difficult to diagnose. Generalizations/absolutes are the enemy in these cases. Take the phrase:

All Dogs are friendlier than cats.

It may sound simple, but that's only because it's an absolute. For an animal control officer, it may serve as a neat heuristic. While this is a simple rule, it would be near impossible to be completely true. 
I'm reality dogs fall under a normal distribution of kindness. Cats fall under a normal distribution of kindness. The simplest thing to say here is that every cat and dog has an individual level of kindness. To add any generalizations would imply that there is some underlying cause.

## my point
My point here is that Occam's razor does not apply to laws or rules. Just because "all thievery deserves a punishment of jail time" sounds simple, it is only simple for the judge. It would be impossibly complex to prove it would be always right. 
Everything is nuanced. The simplest solution to every problem will be, "every situation should be evaluated individually". So any law or rule will be wrong for some set of people.
Next time you are arguing at the dinner table what policy is right, remember that EVERY policy is wrong. Usually one option is bad for one set of people, and another policy is bad for a different set of people.  
Should we add policy to make companies be carbon neutral? The simple sounding answer would be yes or no, but the truly simplest answer would be, "every companies situation is different and a separate calculation is needed for every company". If you are a policy maker that answer won't do, so you need to draw a line somewhere. But no matter where you draw the line,  by drawing the line you will most likely be wrong in some cases. 
