---
layout: post
title: Nudges
---
# Motivation
I have been told my entire life that making big changes requires primarily motivation, drive, and grit. Cute little tricks can be added to slightly help on days I'm not feeling 100% motivated. For instance, if I want to start a diet I need to start by asking why I want to lose weight and that will give me motivation. Only then, once I have the motivation down I can start adding on little tricks like keeping the chocolates on the higher shelf.

This idea is reinforced when conventionally successful people attribute their success to their motivation. 

In reality there are a lot of factors such as socio-economic, location, luck, and other un-controllable variables. But, no point in discussing things you can't control.

> "Get More Lucky" -My new self help book

Even as far as the things you can control, I don't think motivation is always the most important! 
There are a lot of ways to motivate yourself...
- Social Influence
- Incentivising
- External
- Internal
- cute little tips and tricks

I think it is possible the "cute little tips and tricks" we often hear about are so much more important than we think. 

Our brains are fantastic at performing tasks quickly and without deep thought sometimes called system 1 (Daniel Kahneman). Our brains are just as great at being able to slow down and deeply think about something in our system 2. 

It is important to recognize that so much important decision making happens without deep thought at all.

Let's put a name to "cute little tips and tricks", how about Nudges

# Nudges
You are probably familiar with Richard Thaler's work on Nudges, or small suggestions that can effect big decisions.

To me a nudge seems like an exploit of our System 1 and System 2 prioritizations. I don't normally enjoy being exploited, but sometimes these Nudges are beign used in really GREAT ways.

## Some nudges are DESIGNED to be good:
- Automatic Enrollment in 401K plans
- Automatic Enrollment in Organ Donor programs
- Speed Limit signs
- Healthy Eating posters in cafeterias
- Huge displays of Calories on Food
- Some smart thermostats try to use less AC when there is a lot of demand

## Some nudges are DESIGNED to be bad:
- Up-selling items
- Auto-enrolling free subscriptions
- Adverts
- Push-notifications

I didn't want to pass judgement on good or bad nudges, but it is helpful to draw attention to two other categories of nudges...

## Some nudges are NOT DESIGNED AT ALL but turn out great...
Some things in nature, and even in human design just accidentally have a small aspect that helps you make large choices
- Steam is a good nudge not to touch water
- The smell of Fresh air is a good Nudge to go outside more
- A small unexplicable pain might be a great nudge to go to the doctor
- Electricity arching from anything is a good nudge not to touch that object
- Smoke coming from my car is a good nudge to stop my car

None of those things are by design, but I would argue they are small signals that push us in the direction of making big decisions.

## There are also some nudges that are NOT DESIGNED AT ALL and are bad...
- Tire screeching noise nudges you to turn towards that noise often before running away
- an injury might nugde you away from going to the doctor if it is painful to move
- adreneline often nudges us into doing dangerous things

OK, at this point it seems like I have stretched the definition of nudge so far it now includes evolutionary theory. The point isn't whether these are true Nudges or not it is all the unseen potential in these UNDESIGNED nudges.

Here are some that I have noticed and tried to use to my advantage
-Opening a window nudges me to get outside. 
-Having a clean desk nudges me to stay focused
-Music without lyrics nudges me to focus
-Getting extra clothes baskets nudges me to not pile up laundry
-Lining up running clothes for the morning nudges me to run

# The part where I circle back and explain why I think this is valuable insight
This isnt a self help blog, but this IS where I circle back and explain why I think this is valuable insight.

We put too much focus on characteristics like motivation when we imagine our own success, but we should also be putting weight on the subtle things, the nudges. 
Every day the world is accidentally putting up tiny little inconveniences. We can't keep attempting to build so much motivation that we can plow through all these inconveniences. 

Our brains don't work that way. We need to appeal to our system 1 brains as well. Will-power wont cut it, we need to nudge ourselfes in the right direction. 

Instead of blaming myself for not running daily and trying to "build up motivation" I am going to try to find little things that nudge me in the direction of running and removing small barriers that make it harder.
- Leaving my running shoes kind of in the way
- Keeping the treadmill completely ready
- Setting up a push reminder on my phone
- Index cards with workouts written down

# Conclusion
When trying to meet goals, motivation isn't always the foundation. For some goals try to start with small nudges in the right direction, build habits, then the motivation will come later. Please don't ignore your System 1!