---
layout: post
title: Book Review- Surely your Joking Mr. Feynman
---

I had heard this title come up as a good example of rational thinking in action. It's an autobiography by Richard Feynman.

Richard Feynman is one of the great theoretical physicists of the day. He is considered one of the greats and has made many contributions through teaching and his various publications. He worked on the Manhattan project, won a Nobel prize, created new ways of depicting subatomic particle interactions, and helped NASA as some of his most famous accomplishments.

# Summary

Each chapter of the book could fall under one of these categories:

-Story about big accomplishment
-bizarre hobby
-challenges he made with others
-funny stories
-women

Before passing any judgement, let's get to the worthwhile views/ideas expressed in this book.

## Big accomplishments
It is cool to feel like you are on the floor of discovery during the Manhattan project with Feynman (morality aside). Feynman's ability to quickly determine what is working, and what isn't and then pivot seems instrumental. He talks about how they setup early computers and learned a method of color coating punch cards so they could run card concurrently while also diagnosing failures.

## bizarre hobby
Feynman devoted entire chapters of the book to his love of radio repair, lock picking, playing samba music, bongo drums, isolation tanks, and more I am forgetting. I really liked these bits. Feynman was a very accomplished genius who also took  years off to live in Rio de Janeiro to play samba music. If he can find time for his hobbies, there is hope for me.

## challenges to others
Looking back maybe this wasn't a huge part but it is notable. Feynman often touted his mathematical ability and challenged others. It was racing a man with an abacus in long division. Or challenging anyone to stump him with a math problem. He even accepted challenges to try to smell who touched a book last.

## funny stories
Feynman depicts himself as a highly intelligent person who needs some guidance through social life. This leads to him making social mistakes like ordering his tea wrong or even sleeping on the couch of Caltech on his first day of being a professor. Some of these lead to some crazy stories I won't spoil.

## Women
Feynman talks openly about how he learned that treating women poorly provides "good results" for him. While a professor, he pretended to be a student to pick up undergrads. His views on women are tough to ignore.

# My Opinions

I know that Richard Feynman was a rational thinker, but I don't think any of that was laid out in this book. What IS in this book is the tales you would hear from a very charismatic and old fashioned (read: misogynist) man at a bar. I think Feynman is an interesting character because we all want to have a scientific mind like him, but we all wish we could ignore his horribly sexist views.

I would suggest this book if you are able to break the need for your story characters to be heroes. The author of this book is no Frodo, he is a flawed human being (as we all are). Once you imagine in your head you are reading an autobiography written by Sauron, you then can read this book properly. I don't mean this to pass as judgement, or to say Feynman is Sauron. But I think hearing cherry picked lighthearted tales about someone makes you like them, so to correct this you need to swing wayyy the other way and assume it is written by a villain.

For example, if I sit a random person down and give them an impromptu math test. Before the test, I assume they are average math-ability; if they score below average I am not going to adjust my assumption too much. My sample size in this is one single test. It’s a rough day, maybe they haven't thought of math in a while... 

If I sit a random person down and ask them for their top three math test scores in their entire life, and they provide below average test scores, I am going to assume they aren't good at math. Now my sample size is every math test they have ever taken, and they still can't impress?

Now an autobiography is someone telling their life story. No one writes an autobiography and picks their most boring stories. You pick the moments you shine, or the moments that define you. If you somehow write your life highlights and I come out thinking, "oh man they have some objectively bad views." I am going to assume that this is just the tip of the iceberg as far as bad views go.

That all being said, we should be able to evaluate ideas separately from who said them.  So why do I care so much about making sure we have the correct view on Feynman? Because it's an autobiography! The point of writing it is to get you to know the main character. So, I think in this case, it is appropriate to discuss his character flaws.

But I don't want this whole book review to be about character flaws.

I loved Feynman's need to solve puzzles. I think everyone has a love of solving problems. Feynman was able to aim his problem solving at math and science. Even his Nobel prize winning idea he describes as effortless fun, as it was just something he was doing for himself.

I enjoyed Feynman's lighthearted pranks, like how he tried to convince people he was an expert locksmith. I think these victimless pranks are fun and creative.

Feynman got tired of making decisions at some point in his life. He made the interesting choice to try to minimize the number of decisions he would need to make. He wouldn't look at job offers or take on any additional responsibilities. This seems bizarre to me, but I am not a Nobel laureate and I think solution is unique to HIS problems and doesn't scale to normies like you and me.

All in all. It's interesting to get into the head of a genius and a real character.