---
layout: post
title: CDC Crossmatch
comments: true
---

*Epistemic status: I am a biologist, and this is what I do for work. I might be incorrect about some terminology, but I discuss this daily with fellow scientists, so this is correct enough to pass their scrutiny. Or maybe they are just being nice and not calling me out all the time?!?!*

# CDC crossmatch
Bob unfortunately is in a place where he needs a solid organ transplant- such as a kidney, liver, lung, or heart. Bob has a friend, Alice, who is willing to lend him a solid organ- let's hope kidney for Alice's sake.

There are a lot of tests we can do to estimate how well Alice's organ will do in Bob's body. We use these tests to determine whether they are a good match for each other.

One of my favorite tests is a Complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) crossmatch. The goal of this post is an overly simplistic explanation of this test.

## Background
I think there are only a few things you need to know prior to reading this. 

### 1) Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA)
Your DNA encodes a lot of different proteins. Some really important proteins are called the HLA antigens. These HLA antigens live on some cell’s surfaces. 

HLA antigens are somewhat unique to each person. Unique like a fingerprint, or a DNA string, or the proteins encoded by that DNA string... This is awesome because our immune system can identify what cells are ours and which are foreign by looking at the HLA antigens. Think of these HLA antigens like some fashionable matching leather vests, they make it easy to identify friend’s vs enemy gangs. 

It's not important to us here, but these HLA antigens aren't just for looks. They grab things from within the cell and "hold it out" and present them to other immune cells. This helps the body identify foreign pathogens! So HLA are functional and fashionable, oh la la. So forget the leather vest example, these are like matching fanny packs.

## Setup
So remember, we want to know if Bob's body will accept Alice's organ. So to do this we are basically going to mix Bob's immune cells with Alice's blood cells. We can then see whether Alice's cells live through the process. If Alice's cells live happily in Bob's immune system, then we can assume her organ would as well.

### Bob's immune cells
This is easy. We centrifuge (spin) Bob's blood, which is stored in a special tube to avoid coagulation. Density differences separate the serum from blood and allow us to grab the serum.

Think of this like letting Italian dressing sit in the cabinet for a while, things separate based off density. But the salad dressing is blood, and the cabinet is a big spinning box. <-first time those words have formed a sentence. 

### Alice's blood
More specifically, we are interested in leukocytes because they have HLA on them. We use the same exact *Italian dressing* technique as Bob but now we grab the red blood, not the serum. 

We have some cool reagents that attach tiny magnetic beads to the leukocytes that we want. Then, like giving woolly willy a fresh hair-do- we can then just put a magnet next to our blood and pull out the cells we want! It's slightly more complicated, but that is the basic premise.

## Mixing Alice's cells with Bob's serum
We just need to standardize concentrations and mix them! 

### Normalize
We have a cool florescent dye that stains cells bright green if they are alive and orange if they are dead.

We take a small sample of Alice's cells, stain them, and raise or lower their concentration to our liking. 

### mixing
We mix Alice's standardized cells in a tray, with Bob's serum. We do this a couple times over so we have duplicates.

## Incubate and score
Finally we give the cells an hour to incubate in a dark warm spot, then we can see the results!

### Incubate
This is literally just letting Alice's cells sit in Bob's serum. At one point we add a reagent called "compliment". The idea behind this is that Bob's serum doesn't technically have everything needed to kill cells, compliment allows markers to attach to cells and start killing them. By adding compliment, we allow Bob's serum to kill Alice's cells through a method called the *compliment cascade* (would make a good band name).

### See results
Once the reaction is done, we add a florescent dye that turns live cells green and dead cells orange! We can now check to see who won! (pro tip: try not to be colorblind for this part)

Hopefully everything is green, this means Alice's organ would do great in Bob's immune system. But maybe, there is some cell death, and we should think twice before performing this transplant.

# Conclusion
A fun thing about the CDC test is that *we should probably be able to guess the results before even performing the test*. To be discussed elsewhere, we can check for blood type matches, HLA matches, we can check for antibodies (not discussed, but they are markers in Bob's serum regarding what to kill), we also a very similar test that is even more sensitive than CDC. In fact, some labs don't perform this test anymore. It's true, you can _almost_ predict a CDC test result without running the test. Still, sometimes we get surprised.

The beauty of this test is that it is the closest thing to a real-world test of putting one person's organ in another person.

Thanks for reading, more to come. Please use the comments to ask questions or discuss!


```
There are some interesting and pesky details I will list but not explain.

- we use a negative and positive control for this test
- we can do this for different cell types
- sometimes people with auto-immune disorders will kill their own cells! This makes the test hard to interpret.
- There are different types of cell rejection, Igg and Igm mediated. Igg is usually what we see for organ rejection so we can treat serum to rule out effects from Igm in some cases.
```
